
MIDDLESEX UNIVERSITY
THE BURROUGHS, HENDON LONDON NW4 4BT

Title: CST3133 Coursework - Applied Data Science and AI Workflow
List all students in the group - Remove this line!
Student Name/Surname - Student ID:
Name1 Surname1 - M0XXXX1
Name2 Surname2 - M0XXXX2
Name3 Surname3 - M0XXXX3
Name4 Surname4 - M0XXXX4

		Word Count: ... Do not forget to add the word count!  Max 7000!

Make sure that this page stays as a cover page only - Remove this!
Make sure to list all the student details (name/surname/ID) at this page (cover page) even if a student is not communicating nor collaborating. Such a case must be reported in the peer-evaluation form in a confidential manner or via email! - Remove this!
Note: Designed for CST3133 - Advanced Topics in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, this template may be customised. You may improve the visual style and include additional sections/subsections as needed, provided the core requirements are met. Use Arial/12, paragraph alignment style: Justify (CRTL+J). Make sure the report looks tidy, neat and stylish. Each captioned figure needs to be explained well so that figures do not look scattered around the report with no use, which also looks bad as the style. - [Remove this!] 
Contents	
1.1 Dataset Selection and Problem Definition (5%) [create subsection and/or subsubsection as required, remove!]	3
1.2. Data Preprocessing (10%)	3
1.2.1 Figure samples: when to caption and cross-reference	3
1.2.2. Figure samples: when no caption nor cross-referencing is required!	4
1.3. Exploratory Data Analysis (10%)	6
1.4. Model Development and Evaluation (15%)	6
1.5. Ethical Considerations (5%)	6
2.1. Text Dataset Selection and Preprocessing (15%)	7
2.2. Deep Learning Model Implementation (20%)	7
2.3. Evaluation and Insights (10%)	7
3. References	7
4. Important Notes [- Remove this once read!]	8




Make sure to keep this page only for Table of Contents (ToC) - Remove this!












[Make sure to start your answers from this (third) page, remove bullet points and replace with your choice of subsection title(s). If the solution structure (title names and order) is as in the coursework description, it is fine - Remove this!]
Section 1 - Traditional Machine Learning Workflow and Ethics

1.1 Dataset Selection and Problem Definition (5%) [create subsection and/or subsubsection as required, remove!]
* [3p] Select an appropriate structured dataset and clearly define the problem by stating whether it is a classification, regression or clustering problem.
* [2p] Ensure the dataset is relevant and publicly available on GitHub, Kaggle, UCI, etc., and provide a link to it and upload it when submitting the coursework. Provide an overview of the dataset's features and target variable.
1.2. Data Preprocessing (10%)
* [5p] Handle missing values appropriately, as required. If using pre-cleaned data, introduce noise and focus on identifying and mitigating noise, NaN, or missing values. We are not interested in how you introduce the noise but rather in how you handle and address data quality issues. Do not forget to upload the final noisy dataset you used. 
* [5p] Scale/normalize numerical features and encode categorical variable, as required. Instead of scaling/normalisation, you may conduct logical feature engineering. To clarify, either implement scaling/normalisation plus encoding categorical variables or feature engineering plus encoding categorical variables.
1.2.1 Figure samples: when to caption and cross-reference
Following figure is an example of how you should use the figures including labelling, captioning and cross-referencing from the text where you discuss its relevant aspects along with justification and analyses, not just descriptive aspects.

Figure 1. Distribution of stopword counts in reviews.

An analysis into the count of stopwords within each review was carried out using the NLTK English language stopword list. The histogram shown in Figure 1 [this is cross-referencing here - remove!] visualises the amount of non-informative stopwords within reviews. An excessive amount of stopwords was identified with some reviews exceeding 200, emphasising the need for noise reduction before model training.

[Example of justification, analysis, design decisions, why took this path but not another - remove!] These visual insights provided key guidance for the preprocessing steps on the dataset. The balanced sentiment distribution and the lack of duplicate review entries confirmed that no class weighting or sampling adjustments were required. However, the variable review lengths and word counts highlighted the need for text standardisation. Outliers within the word count and character length would introduce variability and inefficiencies into the model. Additionally, the prevalence of stopwords would introduce noise that could obscure meaningful sentiment tokens. To address these issues, the dataset was prepared using tokenisation and stopword removal, with padding and truncation techniques aided by the NL TK library. This approach ensured that all reviews were represented consistently and efficiently, reducing noise while preserving the
sentiment-relevant structure of each review.

1.2.2. Figure samples: when no caption nor cross-referencing is required!
If the figure needs to be explained in detail, then you should caption and cross-ref from the text you discussed the relevant figure. Otherwise, you don't need to caption and cross-ref if it is just to prove a point. For example:

.................
The approach here will be a little bit different. We first decided to look at the top 10 most selling games globally to see which developer/publisher seems to pull the most revenue. We believe that depending on the publisher that is tied to the sale number, it means that it is possible that the publisher that occurs on top the most is the more popular publisher/developer.


Figure 2. Top 10 ranked by Global Sales in gaming sector.

Looking at the results in Figure 2 [this will need a caption and cross-referencing, REMOVE!], Nintendo completely dominates the charts. In some way, this can seem understandable, with Nintendo being one of, if not, the biggest game company catered to the younger demographic. Some of its games also target those who would want to play with their family and friends, especially locally or in real life. Those games include Mario Kart and Wii Sports, with those specifically advertised to be played via multiplayer. It also doesn't help that Nintendo is a veteran company, started in the 80s and producing iconic franchises like Super Mario and Pokemon, their experience throughout the years clearly shows its positives. Another observation that was interesting was the number of games made by one publisher:


NOTE: We did not caption nor cross-reffed because it was mainly used to prove a single point between the lines which did not need a worthy discussion - remove! However, these are the screenshot figures you should use, NOT the code screenshots alone or large code blocks (screenshot maximum 2 line of code only if you are printing out the output cell results together. This approach could be very useful especially when output cell result is only one line and you want it to look a little larger than one line to take attention)! For example:



The above screenshot looks very small, and you can print it as the one below with the 2 line of code together:

The greatest number of games collected in this dataset came from Electronic Arts, and despite this their games don't do as well in sales compared to Nintendo's games.:


................
1.3. Exploratory Data Analysis (10%)
* [5p] Create insightful visualizations, e.g., histograms and correlation heatmaps (explore features and identify relationships).
* [5p] Identify and comment on key trends, patterns, and potential biases in the data.

1.4. Model Development and Evaluation (15%)
* [5p] Train traditional machine learning models, e.g., supervised: linear regression, decision trees, and unsupervised: K-means.
* [5p] Use appropriate evaluation metrics, e.g., R-squared, accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, etc.
* [5p] Provide a clear interpretation of the model performance using classification report, tables or graphs.

1.5. Ethical Considerations (5%)
* [2p] Highlight potential biases or fairness issues in the dataset or models. 
* [3p] Suggest practical strategies for mitigating these ethical challenges - no implementation is required.













[Start with a new page for Section 2!, Remove bullet points and replace with your choice of subsection title(s), remove!]
Section 2- Natural Language Processing and Deep Learning (45%)

2.1. Text Dataset Selection and Preprocessing (15%)
* [5p] Select a publicly available text dataset, for example, IMDb reviews, Amazon product reviews, AG News, depending on what you want to achieve and provide an overview of the dataset.
* [5p] Preprocess the dataset, for example, clean text, tokenize, remove stopwords, etc.
* [5p] Use pre-trained embeddings, e.g., GloVe, Word2Vec for feature representation.
2.2. Deep Learning Model Implementation (20%)
* [10p] Design and train a neural network, e.g., RNN, LSTM for a text-based task, e.g., sentiment analysis. Include layers such as embeddings (pre-trained or learnable), recurrent layers, and fully connected layers for prediction, drop-out layers, early stopping measures, etc. Provide detailed explanations of the layers and their purposes.
* [10] Experiment with batch size, learning rate, and dropout rates to optimize performance. Any attempts for testing and improving the performance should be included for better marks/outcome. You are free to use "grid search" like methods for finding optimal learning parameter values (hyperparameter tuning).
2.3. Evaluation and Insights (10%)
* [5p] Use appropriate evaluation metrics, e.g., confusion matrix, accuracy, precision, recall, loss curves. You should use learning curves (e.g., loss vs. epochs) to demonstrate training and validation trends.
* [5p] Highlight strengths, limitations and areas for improvement, e.g., transformer models (BERT).
3. References
This section should include a list of all the work cited in your project, and only those that you cited. It is important that that you follow once citation style for listing the references and be consistent with the use of it. Below is the Harvard style as an example reference list: 

Burton, P.A. (2012) Castles of Spain. Available at: http://www.castlesofspain.co.uk/ (Accessed: 14 October 2018).

Hremiak, A. and Hudson, T. (2011) Understanding learning and teaching in secondary schools. Harlow: Pearson Longman.

Norrie, C. et al. (2012) 'Doing it differently? A review of literature on teaching reflective practice across health and social care professions', Reflective Practice, 13(4), pp. 565-578. [- Only include the references used and remove the ones that are provided as examples.]

4. Important Notes [- Remove this once read!]
Please remember that one student per group to do the submission of the unified report and .zip file encompassing dataset, .ipynb (notebook) and license (if needed) using two respective submission links.
All students (each one of you in a group) must submit the peer-assessment file (which is an excel file) separately and confidentially using the third submission link. Not doing so or not doing this correctly will lead to 5% penalty. A list of penalty to be provided at the coursework page.
Please do not hesitate to contact if you require any further clarifications: h.yetgin@mdx.ac.uk Dr. - [Remove this!]
Halil Yetgin
Module Leader [Remove everything that is not required in this report! Personalise it to your group!]
Coursework: CST3133 - Advanced Topics in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence


